So she came out to San Francisco, we got married there, December the 1st, 1943.
And my ship was in there for one month, we got that much time together, and then we went out again and so she went home here.
Now you served in the Pacific?
Yes.
Primarily?
And during the war, were you aware of any preparation you received at A&M that helped you be a better officer?
I think so.
For example, one of the first things when I arrived, even from the very beginning, when I arrived in midshipmen school,
All of us had to have college degrees, et cetera.
And I was there just a very short time.
And of course we had a little history of our lives written up and so on.
And I had indicated I had been in ROTC and I had been in the National Guard.
And so I wasn't there just a very few days.
And I was called out and I was a one striper.
I was a student.
student officer, if you want to call it that, of our group.
And I was a one striper, so to speak.
And in that sense, it sure helped a lot, you know.
But other than that, I'm not sure, you know.
All right.
Summarize your war experience and then bring us back here to home.
Okay.
My first ship was an ammunition ship.
And I went out to the South Pacific State out there for quite a long time, came back in.
Then we took a second trip to Pearl Harbor.
And while there, on the way back, I got orders to go to another ship that was under construction.
And it was in Tampa, Florida.
It was also an ammunition ship.
So I got to Tampa, Florida.
And in the meantime, it wasn't ready.
So they sent me to Newport, Rhode Island to help get the crew together and all that sort of stuff.
until they were sort of ready for us to come back down to Tampa.
So we put that ship in commission in Tampa.
And then that was the second ship.
And we were out, we were past the Panama Canal, as a matter of fact, and got orders to go to the third ship.
So I left that one and my third ship was also being completed in Key West.
And it was a water ship.
And it was a big old tanker.
We made fresh water out of salt water.
And the ships, you know, we made it specifically for those ships who didn't have enough for their own use.
So we put that one into commission.
Went to the Chesapeake Bay and around that area for the shakedown, then came back through the Panama Canal again, and then I went out to sea again for a pretty good while.
And while there, I was the first lieutenant on that one, which had to do with
It had to do with balance, among other things, keeping the ship balanced.
If you know anything about water it's a tricky kind of a thing.
Anyway, I had a lot of fun with that and spent some time there.
And then, like I told you, then I had plenty of points to get out but they wouldn't let me out.
The old man released me and I got assigned to the Yorktown, which is a big carrier.
And I stayed there in the Pacific for a while and then came back to California and then finally home.
Let's see, during the war, do you remember hearing about Franklin Roosevelt's death?
Was that a, for me on the home front, that was a very...
important day.
Were there any other events that you remember exactly where you were, how you felt when you heard the news of a certain event?
Well, one event I remember that we were in the South Pacific.
Matter of fact, we were on the way to Manila, out there somewhere.
when they announced that the Japanese had given in.
I remember that.
What was the reaction of you and your friends?
Oh, man, we were all very happy, of course, you know, obviously.
Was there celebrating on the ship?
Well, other than just typically, yeah, everybody was happy and all that, but I don't remember any special thing took place.
All right, and then, so you get out in early 46?
Yep, I believe maybe December 46, I'm not sure.
Oh, okay.
Maybe, yeah.
All right, and then... No, wait, hold it.
I started here, school in February of 46.
Okay, so you got out in December 45.
I guess so, something like that, yeah.
Did you think about going to graduate school anywhere else?
Not really, no.
So close to wife and family and home and all?
That was the key factor.
Yeah.
All right.
Being able to get out of the Navy.
And with the GI Bill, so for the first time as a student, you weren't quite as strapped financially.
That's correct.
Where did you all live?
Well, we lived in an apartment first in Bryan and then
Well that's where we lived.
And while I was a student at A&M, as a graduate student, also was given an assistantship.
So, man, we were living in a high on a hog.
Ninety bucks a month from Uncle Sam, and at that time assistantships paid $67.50 a piece.
So we had $157.50 and we lived well on that.
My wife, incidentally, had continued to work some.
No, she didn't either.
So anyway, that was it.
So what happened though when I was in graduate school here is that I had a guy whose name was Melvin Brooks.
He was a professor in sociology.
And we got along very well and he was a very bright guy.
He was a Wisconsin man.
And he wanted me to go to Wisconsin to do graduate work.
I didn't know if I wanted to do further work or not, but anyway, I thought, well, maybe, anyway.
So he had me to apply, and I got accepted in assistantship.
So, well, in the meantime, while I was here, there was no, well, train service was the main thing to get here.
And what happened was that a group of professors had come from Louisiana State on the train,
And I got assigned to pick them up in my car and bring them to the campus to about a three-day big seminar or whatever they had and kind of be their gopher and got acquainted with them.
One of the leading guys at that time had written a leading textbook in Rural Sociology.
And we sort of got acquainted and he began to ask me about himself and I said well I grew up in this Czech community and all that sort of stuff.
He said, and that was a big thing at that time at LSU, they had some mini-grants for studies for their students.
they studied they did their dissertations they went like say to Argentina to Brazil of people who had moved from the United States to those countries in terms of adapting and all that and so he said to me he said young man do you realize that you you got a ready-made dissertation right there topic
You know, you speak it, you know, you do this, you know, we're in that business.
So I changed horses and went to LSU instead.
And that's about it.
When did you get over to LSU?
Do you remember when?
Yes, in the summer of 1947, I believe.
So you had your master's done here?
Yes, yes.
And you go over there.
Yeah.
And by then, are you pretty well on course to be a faculty member?
Had you thought you wanted to be a...
Not really.
I didn't know.
I just thought that was the kind of thing to do.
And while there I spent many hours studying, you know, working hard, in the meantime getting letters from
You know, people tell me about all the success that my buddies were having at home, farming, and I kept saying to my wife, I just wonder if we shouldn't quit this stuff and go back to farming.
Anyway, so we finished, and we finished at a good time.
There were not many PhDs in my field, and there were lots of opportunities.
And in those days, the good old boy system was under operation.
number of schools that were looking for people, my folks recommended me to them.
And I really had, I guess, some choice of where I wanted to go.
So when the guys here at A&M wrote me and said, we would like to have you here if you'd like, et cetera,
We talked about it, and Kitty says, well, you know me, I'd like to be at home, so that's how we ended up here.
Now, when did you come back and join the faculty?
1949 in September.
And you had your dissertation, everything wrapped up?
Yes, complete everything.
That degree was in hand.
I'd finished that summer in August of 49 and started in September.
And we're not going to talk about money on any other question, but what was your starting salary?
Okay.
My starting salary was $4,500.
for nine months, 500 a month.
And it also, the telegram says there may be some opportunity to also get some summertime.
And I might add that I came here and the sort of story behind that is that there was a special course
called Rural Society 407, whatever it was, that the dean at that time, Shepardson, he had gotten a lot of complaints about people graduating from the College of Agriculture being very, very good in their chosen agricultural field, but not doing too well out there with the people that they were working with.
So somebody, I don't know where, he got the idea.
that it would be good if it had something dealing with people.
So he decided to make it required of all ag majors that had to have a course in rural sociology.
And there was this one course.
And that was while I was at LSU.
And some of the guys who were teaching there were not that good at it, what it was.
So when I came here,
He called me the very first day I was here at 8 o'clock on a Monday morning.
He called me to his office and said that we were in the same building, the Ag building.
He said, young man, I want you to know we brought you here because I've been having lots of problems from guys like, without naming anybody, the guys in agriculture.
They resented the fact that they had to take this old, you know, something else outside their field, you know.
And they said, lots of flack and I want you to know you're kind of under the gun here.
So my first semester I taught five sections of that one course.
The spring semester I taught five sections of the same course.
And by then he was pretty happy with me.
And then that summer I taught
two sections of the same course, and there were two summer terms.
I believe I taught 12 sections of the same course that first year.
And what was it called?
It was called Rural Sociology 407.
But what was the title?
I really think it was just called Rural Sociology, but I don't know.
I think it was.
And it was how to understand the people?
Well, no, no.
It basically was
introductory sociology however applied to the, specifically to the rural scene.
And of course you had grown up there.
Yeah.
And I was very fortunate in this story about him.
He used to, my classroom was in room 105 on that floor where the dean was.
The dean was down the hall.
And I thought it was very interesting that
Each time I was in that class, it seemed like he had, the bathroom was on the other end.
He had to walk by and kind of look in.
And I remember that somewhere along about the middle of my first semester, he called me and said, hey, you know, I just want you to know that you're doing pretty good, something like that.
All right.
What were your goals for that course?
Tell them what your basic philosophy was.
My basic philosophy was human behavior, you know.
Basically, basic sociology really just to give them an idea of human behavior and how it operates and how people operate in groups and that sort of stuff.
Just a plain old stuff.
What were the general rules that you had for yourself and for the students in that course?
Well, the general rules that I had from the very beginning was that they were something like this.
I was going to seat you guys alphabetically to begin with, somehow.
That's what I knew.
And I was going to learn the names and all that.
And I would know who was absent and all that sort of stuff.
tell them that class attendance was important.
And that while I would not deliberately fail someone because of that, I certainly, if there was ever any question about anything, if you're going to miss a bunch of class time, don't come to me with any problems.
I sort of laid the rule down and pointed out to them that the class begins at this time and that kind of stuff.
That was about it.
Did you grade on the curve?
No, not really.
What kinds of tests did you give?
Basically true-false, multiple choice, and then there was always a discussion question or two, what I'd call discussion.
And about how many students per section?
that first semester, the first year, 50 per section, because that's all the room would hold.
So I had 250, 250, and oh, I don't know, maybe another 100 or so, well, maybe more.
So I had a pretty good 6,700 students the first year.
Now surely during those early years, you had some interesting anecdotes in working with those students.
Can you share some of those experiences?
Yeah, well, basically I'd say this, to begin with, they were excellent.
They were really very, very good kids.
And they really behaved well.
I really can't recall, although I imagine it did happen, anybody going to sleep or anything like that.
But on the other hand, I'm going to say it to you honestly, I just knocked myself out.
trying to make it interesting and I was, there was always something in the newspaper or some news magazine like Newsweek or something that applied to something I was talking about.
And I'd always bring these clippings to class and we'd talk about, you know, it was all part of it.
It wasn't just strictly textbook stuff.
Surely you must have had some interesting creative excuses that students would try to make for why they weren't there or why they didn't pass.
I can't really, you know, it's really kind of, I can't remember anybody really ever trying to pull things.
We were pretty stressed.
I think they had the impression that I was there for business and that I was going to do my part and I expected to do their part and I didn't get flack from people or anything like that.
And they were not, they were always very obedient.
I don't remember anybody challenging me.
You don't like to say, hey, you know, prof, you didn't, you know.
They were just nice kids, just nice kids.
In those early days, as a faculty member, describe a typical work day for you.
What time did you get there?
What did you spend the day doing?
Where?
Okay.
First, I would always leave the house probably around 7 o'clock.
I had an 8 o'clock class.
In those days, the classrooms were locked.
And I would get there, and I would go up the, and it just took a few minutes to get there.
And I would look at my class notes every time before I went to class and say, this is what I'm going to try to cover today, and so on.
And then about 10 minutes before, I would go down and unlock the classroom.
And they would all go in, and 10 o'clock sharp, I went in.
And we started.
I always made it for sure to be through at 50 minutes after I started and all that.
But I can't recall any real unusual kind of a thing.
What about lunch?
Where was... Oh, typically I took my own lunch and ate it in the office.
By yourself or with some buddies?
Mostly by myself, I guess.
Or sometimes Brooks would bring his lunch, he was still here, he'd bring his lunch and a couple of others would come in, but you know, basically.
And I really spent most of my lunchtime, I think, eating a sandwich and looking at my notes for the next time and that sort of thing.
All right, and then the afternoons, what?
Well, okay, in the first place I had five sections.
Three presentations, Monday, Wednesday, Friday, and by the way in those days we had a Saturday also, and two I guess on Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday I guess.
And I almost never went anywhere to run around anything like that.
I spent my time there working on the next day's presentations.
What time would you head home?
A little bit after five.
And by the way, there's another thing.
The dean at that time was, he was, he really kept close track of people.
He kind of knew when people were in place and not, and I was, I was one that he could count on being there after it was over.
Now, this was the Department of Agricultural Economics and Rural Sociology?
And Rural Sociology, that's correct.
All right, who were some of your key colleagues those early years?
the early years L.P.
Gabbard was the head of the department.
He was an economist, okay.
Now my rural sociology group were Dan R. Davis, Cigar Davis, and Melvin Brooks, who was my major professor at the graduate level there.
And also, by the way, at that time
We encompassed more than just rural sociology.
Of course Dan Russell was also sort of the chairman of our group.
And we actually offered, we were the only ones to offer what we would call journalism.
There was no separate journalism there.
And a guy by the name of Otis Miller.
taught journalism, but he was not in sociology.
Well, he was in our department.
And let's see, what else?
And there were a few others here and there, some of which just stayed a year and left and that kind of thing, but those were the key pieces.
How many of those people in rural sociology had their PhD?
Melvin Brooks and I were the only two.
And were you well accepted as a beginning faculty member?
I think so.
I think I was really
fully accepted.
And they welcomed me with an open arm.
It was a very, very congenial, very nice group of people.
They never had any problem with anybody.
It was just a great bunch.
And did you, were you able to get summer assignment early on?
Okay.
Look, the first summer I taught, the first semester I believe it was, okay.
And there was a guy, there were some guys, ag economists, who had a field research project.
It was a big project.
And they hired me to do interviewing with them, mainly in Bell County.
And so I did that the second six weeks.
So I had a good year.
And then also what had happened is that the, how was this now?
And that worked out well.
And I think that Mr. Gabbard, and by the way, even though Russell was chairman of our group, he had very little say-so about it really.
Gabbard made the decisions.
And I think he, somebody approached the people at the experiment station.
about the fact that at many land-grant colleges they had rural sociologists doing research.
And so I think after I was there probably the first year I then got a part-time appointment with the experiment station.
But I was the only rural sociologist attached, of course, to my regular department.
Yeah.
What was your research topic?
Okay.
In the first place let me say this.
When I first started out, I want, back up, the experimentation, well, on the campus in general at that time, this is in 1949-50, a lot of people thought of sociology, anybody who had the title sociology,
was kind of a wild-haired kind of a, you know, non-conformist, you know, all that sort of stuff, really.
And so I decided that whatever I was going to do, I was going to be on the safe side.
I would not try to do anything that might cause anybody to raise their hackles.
And so there was a new law passed in Texas called the Gilmer-Akin Laws that had to do with
consolidating schools and all that sort of stuff.
So I thought, well, this would be a good place I could start, I could do a study of
of what happened under the Gilmer-Akin laws, to what degree.
The best I could tell, this was working, what was happening to the kids, how much time they spent on school buses, all that sort of stuff.
So I wrote a research proposal.
And at that time, the director of the Experimental Station was the government of Patterson.
And I had my pipelines to find out what was going on.
And I got no action for a while.
As a matter of fact, you know, didn't get word back it was approved, I was on the payroll.
But I found out from others at that level that Patterson was rather wondering if I wasn't one of these wild haired guys, and if I was going to do this, if that really wasn't going to stir up a lot of problems.
And by the way, and so it didn't get approved for a while.
But anyway, by the time that the second year there was over nine months, it had gotten approved, so I spent the summer then working on that project.
research piece on it, you know, bulletin.
Matter of fact, it was called.
And I was told he was very, very happy that this guy really didn't stir up a bunch of problems.
And so from that point, it was pretty much.
Basically, what did you discover in that research?
I really don't recall the final things, but stuff like to what degree did the kids who had to ride the school buses very long distances, to what degree this seemed to affect their performances and things like that, and kinds of things like that.
I forget now, but there were a number of counties in which we did this, and I went to the schools.
Like there was an elected school superintendent, for example, and talked about the information with that person, and actually they had in the background about what was happening and all that sort of stuff.
I don't recall.
I wish I'd have kept a copy of that first publication like that.
Then after that, that came out all right.
So I think the next thing I did, I sort of lucked out.
In the meantime, the people in the USDA that I'd gotten acquainted with through other reigns, I got a really, and for those days, a pretty good, no wait a minute, that was about 1960 I guess.
I don't know.
At LSU one of the main things that I got exposed to was demography.
So I got interested in that and I began then to teach a course in that area, an undergraduate course, and that went over very well.
And so I began to do publications for the experiment station about what is happening in Texas demographically.
and even did a study of some counties specifically and tried to write about how this might influence things in the future, all that sort of stuff.
So I sort of got into that.
Then about 1960, I guess it was, somewhere in maybe 58, I got a really big research grant from USDA in Washington, D.C.
And what they wanted to know at that time was
Almost everybody was covered under Social Security, except farmers were not.
And so what they wanted was a study of farmers per se who were sort of approaching retirement age
and how they were doing.
Did they really have enough resources to retire on by themselves without all that sort of stuff.
So I worked with the people in Washington D.C.
on that one.
And we selected about, they selected for me really about four counties I believe it was in which we did the study per se to try to get at these questions.
not to draw my conclusion as to whether or not they should be extended Social Security or not, or whether they should be covered by it, or whether, but just simply what was happening to these people in retirement and that sort of stuff.
And supposedly we and Kentucky and Connecticut I believe and somebody else were the states chosen for that.
And supposedly they used this in Congress to sort of, in the argument about whether or not to extend Social Security to farmers.
And so that was one, that was a big project that Nixon and I had.
And then from that point on it was, and that went over very well.
And I guess from that point on.